DOC-12351 Add or Remove Services and Rebalance (#3846)
couchbase/docs-server: modules/manage/pages/manage-nodes/modify-services-and-rebalance.adoc

= Modify Services and Rebalance
:description: pass:q[Add or remove non-Data Services on existing nodes in a cluster and rebalance the cluster without adding or removing nodes.]
:page-toclevels: 3

[abstract]
{description}

> Dynamically add or remove the following Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) services on existing nodes in a cluster from the Couchbase xref:manage:manage-nodes/modify-services-on-nodes-and-rebalance.adoc#modify-mds-services-from-ui[UI], xref:rest-api:rest-set-up-services-existing-nodes.adoc[REST API], or xref:manage:manage-nodes/modify-services-on-nodes-and-rebalance.adoc#modify-mds-services-using-cli[CLI]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can dynamically add or remove the following Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) services on existing nodes in a cluster from the Couchbase xref:manage:manage-nodes/modify-services-on-nodes-and-rebalance.adoc#modify-mds-services-from-ui[UI], xref:rest-api:rest-set-up-services-existing-nodes.adoc[REST API], or xref:manage:manage-nodes/modify-services-on-nodes-and-rebalance.adoc#modify-mds-services-using-cli[CLI]:
```

* `index` (Index Service)
* `n1ql` (Query Service)
* `fts` (Search Service)
* `cbas` (Analytics Service)
* `eventing` (Eventing Service)
* `backup` (Backup Service)

Then a rebalance operation is automatically triggered to distribute the service workload across the nodes and complete the modification.

You do not have to add or remove a node to add or remove a non-Data Service on a node in a cluster.

> NOTE: You cannot add or remove kv (Data Service) using this method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: You cannot add or remove the Data Service (kv) using this method.
```

Adding or removing of the Data Service on an existing node is supported only through adding or removing nodes.

> For information about adding or removing a Data Service on an existing node, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/manage-data-service-and-rebalance.adoc[Manage a Data Service and Rebalance].

Reviewer 2: For information about adding or removing a Data Service on an existing node, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/manage-data-service-and-rebalance.adoc[Adding or Removing the Data Service on existing nodes].

> For information about adding or removing a Data Service on an existing node, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/manage-data-service-and-rebalance.adoc[Adding or Removing the Data Service on Existing Nodes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about adding or removing the Data Service on an existing node, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/manage-data-service-and-rebalance.adoc[Adding or Removing the Data Service on Existing Nodes].
```

== Prerequisites

Before modifying non-data services on nodes, ensure you have the following:

> * Full Administrator access.

Reviewer: Can you link to roles information about this? Let's be clear on what full admin access entails.

* A clear understanding of the current service distribution across the nodes.
* Service Memory Quota:

> When you add a service that wasn’t earlier present in the cluster, the new service may use the service-specific default memory quota.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you add a service that was not earlier present in the cluster, the new service may use the service-specific default memory quota.
```

Did you run Vale while authoring? That should have been flagged.

This applies to the Index, Search, Eventing, and Analytics services.
+
Verify that the memory quota for the new service meets your requirements using one of the following:

** The REST API from xref:rest-api:rest-get-memory-information.adoc[Getting Memory Information].
** The UI from xref:manage:manage-settings/general-settings.adoc#configure-general-settings-with-the-ui[Configure General Settings with the UI].
+
NOTE: The service memory quota setting is per server node and is reflected in the `GET /pools/default` REST API response.

* Node Disk Storage Paths:
The node disk storage paths are set for all services that require disk storage paths (Data, Indexes, Eventing, Analytics) when a node is initialized.
These storage paths cannot be changed after the node becomes a part of a cluster.

> This means that if you are adding a service (index, fts, cbas, eventing) to an existing node, that service is using the disk storage path that was specified when the node was initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that if you are adding a service (Index, Search, Analytics, Eventing) to an existing node, that service is using the disk storage path that was specified when the node was initialized.
```

Ensure that you know the node disk storage path set for the service that you are adding.
For information on how to view the node disk storage paths, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/list-cluster-nodes.adoc#list-nodes-with-the-rest-api[List Nodes with the REST API].
Use the `GET /pools/default` REST API to find the otpNode value for the node and then use the `GET /nodes/<otpNode>` REST API to view the disk storage paths.
 
[#modify-mds-services-from-ui]
== Modify Services from the UI

> To manage non-data services from the UI, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage non-Data services from the UI, follow these steps:
```

> . Open Couchbase Web Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Open the Couchbase Server Web Console.
```

. Click [.ui]*Servers*.

. Click btn:[Modify Services].

> +
> The [.ui]*Modify Cluster Services* dialog appears, which lists all the nodes in all the clusters and their current services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

+
--
Services that can be modified are:

** *index* (Index Service)
** *n1ql* (Query Service)
** *fts* (Search Service)
** *cbas* (Analytics Service)
** *eventing* (Eventing Service)
** *backup* (Backup Service).
--
+
kv (Data Service) cannot be modified.

. Select the services you want to add for each node and deselect the services you want to remove from each node.
+
NOTE: Adding or removing any service triggers a rebalance operation.

. Click btn:[Rebalance and Change Services].
+
If you're only removing services, adding new instances of services that already exist on the cluster, or adding the backup service, then rebalancing is triggered immediately.

> . If you are adding a service that isn't already on the cluster, and if that service has a memory quota setting option, then the *New Service Settings* dialog appears.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If you are adding a service that is not already on the cluster, and if that service has a memory quota setting option, you must configure the memory quota.
```

Author: What I've written is correct for the procedure, so I'll retain it.

> This dialog lists the services you selected to add, the existing active services, and their current memory quotas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: What I've written is correct, so I'll retain it.

.. Enter the memory quota for each service you're adding.
You can also edit the memory quota for existing services.
+

> For Index Service, choose either *Standard Global Secondary* or *Memory-Optimized*. For more information about index storage, see xref:learn:services-and-indexes:indexes/storage-modes.adoc[Index Storage Settings].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Index Service, choose either *Standard Global Secondary* or *Memory-Optimized*. For more information about index storage, see xref:learn:services-and-indexes:indexes/storage-modes.adoc[Index Storage Settings].
```

+

> For information about managing memory quotas for services from the UI, see xref:manage:manage-settings/general-settings.adoc#memory-quotas[Memory Quotas].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about managing memory quotas for services from the UI, see xref:manage:manage-settings/general-settings.adoc#memory-quotas[Memory Quotas].
```

.. Click btn:[Save Settings].

The rebalancing operation is automatically triggered, which distributes the service workload across the nodes and completes the modification.
Status progress is displayed on the UI.

> When the rebalance operation is successful, an acknowledgment message appears on the UI and an option to download the rebalance report using btn:[Download Report].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the rebalance operation is successful, an acknowledgment message appears on the UI and you can download the rebalance report by clicking btn:[Download Report].
```

[#modify-mds-services-using-cli]
== Modify Services Using CLI

> To modify non-data services on the existing nodes of a cluster using the CLI, use the following `couchbase-cli rebalance` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To modify non-Data services on the existing nodes of a cluster using the CLI, use the following `couchbase-cli rebalance` command:
```

----
couchbase-cli rebalance -c <network_address> \
--username <username> \
--password <password> \
--update-services [--index-[add|remove] <list-of-nodes>] [--n1ql-[add|remove] <list-of-nodes>] [--fts-[add|remove] <list-of-nodes>] [--cbas-[add|remove] <list-of-nodes>] [--eventing-[add|remove] <list-of-nodes>] [--backup-[add|remove] <list-of-nodes>]
----

These are the options for modifying non-data services:

* `--update-services`: Indicates that the rebalance will make changes to the services on the cluster.

* `--<service>-add <node>`: Adds the specified service to the specified node.
`<service>` can be one of the following:

** `index` for the Index Service.
** `n1ql` for the Query Service.
** `fts` for the Search Service.
** `cbas` for the Analytics Service.
** `eventing` for the Eventing Service.
** `backup` for the Backup Service.

* `--<service>-remove <node>`: Removes the specified service from the specified node.

=== Examples

* The `–fts-add` argument adds the full-text search service to the list of nodes.

* The `–index-remove` argument removes the index service from the list of nodes.

> * To add the index service to `node2`, use the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To add the index service to `node2`, use the following command:
```

+
----
couchbase-cli rebalance -c 127.0.0.1 -u Administrator -p password --update-services --index-add node2
----

> * To remove the index service from `node3`, use the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To remove the index service from `node3`, use the following command:
```

+
----
couchbase-cli rebalance -c 127.0.0.1 -u Administrator -p password --update-services --index-remove node3
----

* Trying to remove a service that's not present on the node results in an error.

> From the previous example, if `node3` was not running the index service, the following error occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the previous example, if `node3` was not running the index service, the following error occurs:
```

= Modify Services and Rebalance
:description: pass:q[Add or remove non-Data Services on existing nodes in a cluster and rebalance the cluster without adding or removing nodes.]
:page-toclevels: 3

[abstract]
{description}

Dynamically add or remove the following Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) services on existing nodes in a cluster from the Couchbase xref:manage:manage-nodes/modify-services-on-nodes-and-rebalance.adoc#modify-mds-services-from-ui[UI], xref:rest-api:rest-set-up-services-existing-nodes.adoc[REST API], or xref:manage:manage-nodes/modify-services-on-nodes-and-rebalance.adoc#modify-mds-services-using-cli[CLI]:

* `index` (Index Service)
* `n1ql` (Query Service)
* `fts` (Search Service)
* `cbas` (Analytics Service)
* `eventing` (Eventing Service)
* `backup` (Backup Service)

> Then a rebalance operation is automatically triggered to evenly distribute the service workload across the nodes.

Reviewer 2: Omit "evenly".

You do not have to add or remove a node to add or remove a non-Data Service on a node in a cluster.

NOTE: You cannot add or remove kv (Data Service) using this method.

Adding or removing of the Data Service on an existing node is supported only through adding or removing nodes.

To add a Data Service on a node from the UI:

* xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Add a New Node and Rebalance] along with enabling the Data Service.

* xref:manage:manage-nodes/remove-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Remove a Node and Rebalance].
Then xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.html[add the node] back to the cluster along with enabling the Data Service.

To remove a Data Service from an existing node using the UI:

* xref:manage:manage-nodes/remove-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Remove a Node and Rebalance].
Then xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.html[add the node] back to the cluster by disabling the Data Service.

> * xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Add a New Node and Rebalance] along with disabling the Data Service.

Reviewer 2: These are like the description in the learn services page which was confusing.
I think that it should be:

To add a Data Service on an existing node of a cluster from the UI:
Remove the node that you want to add the Data Service to using Remove a Node and Rebalance. Then add the node back to the cluster along with enabling the Data Service. (Alternatively, you can add a new node with the services configuration desired, including the Data Service, then remove the extraneous node that you no longer need.)

To remove a Data Service from an existing node of a cluster using the UI:
Remove the node with the Data Service that you want to remove using Remove a Node and Rebalance. Then add the node back to the cluster along with disabling the Data Service.

During the node removal operation, if there are other services on the node (that you are removing for the add/remove Data Service reconfiguration), and you do not want those services to be impacted when the node is removed from the cluster, you may need to add those services to another node temporarily or add a new node temporarily with those services enabled.

== Prerequisites

Before modifying non-data services on nodes, ensure you have the following:

* Full Administrator access.
* A clear understanding of the current service distribution across the nodes.
* Service Memory Quota:
When you add a service that wasn’t earlier present in the cluster, the new service uses the service-specific default memory quota.
This applies to the Index, Search, Eventing, and Analytics services.
+
Verify that the memory quota for the new service meets your requirements using one of the following:

** The REST API from xref:rest-api:rest-get-memory-information.adoc[Getting Memory Information].
** The UI from xref:manage:manage-settings/general-settings.adoc#configure-general-settings-with-the-ui[Configure General Settings with the UI].
+
NOTE: The default service memory quota is set per server node and is reflected in the `GET /pools/default` REST API response.

>  

Reviewer 2: There is one more item needed for the Prerequisites.

* Node Disk Storage Paths:
The node disk storage paths are set for all services that require a disk storage paths (Data, Indexes, Eventing, Analytics) when a node is initialized and cannot be changed after the node becomes a part of a cluster.  This means that if you are adding a service (index, fts, cbas, eventing) to an existing node, that service will be using the disk storage path that was specified when the node was initialized.  Be sure that you know the node disk storage path set for the service that you are adding.  For information on how to view the node disk storage paths, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/list-cluster-nodes.adoc#list-nodes-with-the-rest-api[List Nodes with the REST API].  You will need to use the `GET /pools/default `to find the otpNode value for the node, then use `GET /nodes/<otpNode>` to view the disk storage paths.

[#modify-mds-services-from-ui]
== Modify Services from the UI

To manage non-data services from the UI, follow these steps:

. Open Couchbase Web Console.

. Click [.ui]*Servers*.

. Click btn:[Modify Services].
+
The [.ui]*Modify Cluster Services* dialog appears, which lists all the nodes in all the clusters and their current services.
+
--
Services that can be modified are:

** *index* (Index Service)
** *n1ql* (Query Service)
** *fts* (Search Service)
** *cbas* (Analytics Service)
** *eventing* (Eventing Service)
** *backup* (Backup Service).
--
+
kv (Data Service) cannot be modified.

. Select the services you want to add for each node and deselect the services you want to remove from each node.
+
NOTE: Adding or removing any service triggers a rebalance operation.

. Click btn:[Rebalance and Change Services].
+

> If you're only removing services, then rebalancing is triggered immediately.

Reviewer 2: If you're only removing services, adding new instances of services that already exist on the cluster, or adding the backup service, then rebalancing is triggered immediately.

> . If you are adding services, then the *New Service Settings* dialog appears.

Reviewer 2: . If you are adding a service that isn't already on the cluster, and if that service has a memory quota setting option, then the *New Service Settings* dialog appears.

This dialog lists the services you selected to add, the existing active services, and their current memory quotas.

.. Enter the memory quota for each service you're adding.
You can also edit the memory quota for existing services.
+
For Index Service, choose either *Standard Global Secondary* or *Memory-Optimized*. For more information about index storage, see xref:learn:services-and-indexes:indexes/storage-modes.adoc[Index Storage Settings].
+
For information about managing memory quotas for services from the UI, see xref:manage:manage-settings/general-settings.adoc#memory-quotas[Memory Quotas].

.. Click btn:[Save Settings].

> The rebalancing operation is automatically triggered, which evenly distributes the service workload across the nodes.

Reviewer 2: Omit evenly.

. Then xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.html[add the node] back to the cluster along with enabling the Data Service.
+
Alternatively, you can add a new node with the necessary services configuration, including the Data Service, using xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Add a New Node and Rebalance].
Then remove the extraneous node that you no longer need using xref:manage:manage-nodes/remove-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Remove a Node and Rebalance].

To remove a Data Service from an existing node of a cluster using the UI:

. Remove the node with the Data Service that you want to remove using xref:manage:manage-nodes/remove-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Remove a Node and Rebalance].
. Then xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.html[add the node] back to the cluster along with disabling the Data Service.
+
During the node removal operation, if there are other services on the node that you're removing for the Data Service reconfiguration, and you do not want those services to be impacted when the node is removed from the cluster, you may need to add those services to another node temporarily.

> Then add a new node temporarily with those services enabled.

Reviewer 2: Remove lines 25-39.   It's too much info.   All you need to say is (the rest are obvious details and depends on the customer's scenario):

To add or remove a Data Service on an existing node of a cluster:
. xref:manage:manage-nodes/remove-node-and-rebalance.adoc[Remove a Node and Rebalance].
. Then xref:manage:manage-nodes/add-node-and-rebalance.html[add the node] back to the cluster along with adding or removing the data service.

Author: I've added a reference to managing the Data Service:
For information about adding or removing a Data Service on an existing node, see xref:manage:manage-nodes/manage-data-service-and-rebalance.adoc[Manage a Data Service and Rebalance].

== Prerequisites

Before modifying non-data services on nodes, ensure you have the following:

* Full Administrator access.
* A clear understanding of the current service distribution across the nodes.
* Service Memory Quota:

> When you add a service that wasn’t earlier present in the cluster, the new service uses the service-specific default memory quota.

Reviewer 2: Should use "new service may use" instead of "new service uses" -- since we don't know what the cluster has for all the services memory quota.  It could be that all of the services memory quota were customized by the customer regardless of whether the services were actually used or not.  The point is that they should check.

When you add a service that wasn't earlier present in the cluster, the new service may use the service-specific default memory quota.

This applies to the Index, Search, Eventing, and Analytics services.
+
Verify that the memory quota for the new service meets your requirements using one of the following:

** The REST API from xref:rest-api:rest-get-memory-information.adoc[Getting Memory Information].
** The UI from xref:manage:manage-settings/general-settings.adoc#configure-general-settings-with-the-ui[Configure General Settings with the UI].
+

> NOTE: The default service memory quota is set per server node and is reflected in the `GET /pools/default` REST API response.

Reviewer 2: NOTE:  The service memory quota setting is per server node and is reflected in the `GET /pools/default` REST API response.
